.TH TSPDF 1 "2026" "tspdf" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tspdf \- local-first PDF toolkit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tspdf
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tspdf
merges, splits, encrypts, watermarks, compresses and otherwise manipulates
PDF files, entirely on the local machine. No network access, no dependencies.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B merge
Merge multiple PDF files into one.
.TP
.B split
Split a PDF into individual pages or ranges:
.B \-\-pages
extracts a range into one file,
.B \-\-burst
(the default) writes each page to its own file. Embedded file attachments are
copied into every output;
.B \-\-no\-attachments
drops them instead.
.TP
.B rotate
Rotate pages in a PDF by
.B \-\-angle
90, 180, or 270 degrees.
.TP
.B crop
Set the CropBox of pages (clip the visible region without destroying content).
Give one of
.B \-\-box
.IR x0,y0,x1,y1
(relative to the page's MediaBox origin),
.B \-\-margins
.IR t,r,b,l ,
or a uniform
.B \-\-margin
.IR pt .
The box is clamped to the MediaBox.
.TP
.B scale
Resize pages, scaling their content with them (not clipping). Give
.B \-\-factor
.I f
for a uniform scale, or
.B \-\-to
.I a4|letter|legal|a3|a5
to fit content into a named page size (aspect preserved, centered).
.TP
.B delete
Delete pages from a PDF
.RB ( \-\-pages ).
.TP
.B reorder
Reorder pages in a PDF; the
.B \-\-order
list (e.g. 3,1,2) must name every page exactly once.
.TP
.B encrypt
Encrypt a PDF with a password.
.B \-\-bits
selects 128 (the default) or 256\-bit AES;
.B \-\-owner\-password
sets a separate owner password (defaults to the user password);
.B \-\-permissions
takes a comma\-separated list of ALLOWED actions (print, modify, copy,
annotate, forms, extract, assemble, print\-hq) \(em anything not listed is
denied, and without the flag everything is allowed.
.TP
.B decrypt
Decrypt a password-protected PDF.
.TP
.B metadata
View or edit PDF metadata (the Info dictionary):
.B \-\-set
.I key=value
edits a field,
.B \-\-clear
.I key
removes one (both repeatable; keys: title, author, subject, keywords,
creator, producer). If the document also carries
XMP metadata, an edit updates the matching XMP properties too (dc:title,
dc:creator, dc:description, pdf:Keywords, xmp:CreatorTool, pdf:Producer),
since some viewers prefer XMP over the Info dictionary. A field whose XMP
property is missing from the packet is left alone there and a notice names
it. Encrypted files need
.B \-\-password
(or
.BR \-\-password\-file );
edited output keeps the original encryption.
.TP
.B info
Print information about a PDF (pages, sizes, encryption and permissions,
outlines, form);
.B \-\-json
for machine\-readable output.
.TP
.B watermark
Add a text or image watermark to a PDF.
.B \-\-text
draws a diagonal text stamp;
.B \-\-image
draws a PNG/JPEG with
.B \-\-scale
and
.BR \-\-position ;
.B \-\-opacity
(0.0\-1.0, default 0.3) applies to both.
.TP
.B stamp
Overlay a page of another PDF onto pages of the input (like pdftk stamp).
.B \-\-stamp\-page
.I N
picks which page of the stamp file to use;
.B \-\-under
puts it beneath the existing content. Encrypted files are unlocked with
.B \-\-password
(input) and
.B \-\-stamp\-password
(stamp file), or their
.B \-\-password\-file
/
.B \-\-stamp\-password\-file
variants, which read the first line of a file ('\-' reads stdin) so the
password stays out of the process list.
.TP
.B nup
Place multiple source pages onto each output sheet in a grid (imposition,
like pdfjam/pdftk).
.I N
is one of 2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 16.
.B \-\-page\-size
sets the sheet (a4, letter, or source);
.B \-\-landscape ,
.B \-\-gap
.IR pt ,
and
.B \-\-frame
control orientation, cell spacing, and per\-cell borders.
Each page is scaled to fit its cell, aspect ratio preserved and centered.
.TP
.B pagenum
Stamp page numbers on a PDF.
.B \-\-format
takes up to two %d (page number, total),
.B \-\-position
places the label (bottom\-center default),
.B \-\-start
sets the first number,
.B \-\-font\-size
the size in points, and
.B \-\-pages
limits which pages are stamped (numbering still reflects the true position).
.TP
.B compress
Compress a PDF to reduce file size: strips metadata and unused objects and
recompresses streams.
.B \-\-keep\-metadata
preserves the Info dictionary and XMP instead of removing them.
.B \-\-lossy
additionally downsamples oversized photos/scans and re\-encodes them as JPEG,
and black\-and\-white scans as CCITT G4;
.B \-\-image\-dpi
sets the target resolution for photos (default 150),
.B \-\-image\-quality
the JPEG quality 1\-100 (default 75), and
.B \-\-mono\-dpi
the target for black\-and\-white images (default 300 \- text needs more dpi
than photos to stay legible). Without
.B \-\-lossy
no image is altered.
.TP
.B text
Extract text from a PDF to stdout or a file.
.B \-\-pages
selects pages;
.B \-\-layout
preserves the page layout (columns and tables stay aligned).
.TP
.B form
List, fill, or flatten AcroForm form fields.
.B form list
prints the fields as JSON;
.B form fill
takes a JSON object
.RB ( \-\-data )
and/or repeated
.B \-\-set
.I name=value
pairs;
.B form flatten
stamps the values into the page content and removes the form.
.B \-\-force
also fills readonly fields. Values outside WinAnsi (CJK, Greek, ...) are
drawn with a fallback TrueType font when one is found (see ENVIRONMENT).
.TP
.B attach
Embed files in a PDF, or list, extract, or remove embedded files
.RB ( "attach add" / list / extract / remove ).
Added files are stored with their size, modification date, an MD5 checksum,
and a MIME type derived from the file extension
.RB ( "\-\-mime " \fItype\fR
overrides it);
.BI \-\-desc " text"
stores a description with each added file.
.TP
.B bookmark
Edit the outline (bookmarks) of an existing PDF
.RB ( "bookmark list" / add / import / clear ).
.B bookmark list
prints one entry per line as
.IR LEVEL <TAB> PAGE <TAB> TITLE
(or JSON with
.BR \-\-json );
.B bookmark import
reads that same format from a file or stdin
.RB ( "\-\-from " \fIfile\fR ", " "\-\-from -" ),
replacing the outline unless
.B \-\-append
adds the entries after the existing one;
.B bookmark add
appends a single entry
.RB ( "\-\-title" ", " "\-\-page" ", " \-\-level );
.B bookmark clear
removes the outline. Levels are 1\-based and must not jump by more than one;
pages are 1\-based.
.B add
and
.B "import \-\-append"
keep the existing entries as they are: destinations (scroll position, zoom,
view type), actions, colors, styles, and collapsed state are preserved.
.TP
.B img2pdf
Convert images (JPEG/PNG) to a PDF.
.B \-\-page\-size
chooses a4, letter, or a page sized to each image;
.B \-\-best\-effort
skips inputs that fail to load and exits 0 instead of failing.
.TP
.B qrcode
Generate a QR code PDF.
.B \-\-title
and
.B \-\-subtitle
label the page,
.B \-\-no\-link
hides the encoded text below the code, and
.B \-\-ec\-level
.I L|M|Q|H
sets the error-correction level (default M).
.TP
.B md2pdf
Convert Markdown to a styled PDF.
.TP
.B serve
Start a local web server for PDF tools (default port 8080, bound to
127.0.0.1; change with
.B \-\-port
and
.BR \-\-bind ).
.PP
Run
.B tspdf help
.I command
for command-specific options.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show the help message.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version information.
.TP
.BI \-\-password " pass"
Password for an encrypted input PDF. Every command that reads a PDF accepts
it (merge, split, rotate, crop, scale, delete, reorder, metadata, info,
watermark, stamp, nup, pagenum, compress, text, form, attach, bookmark,
decrypt). Except for
.BR decrypt ,
the output keeps the original encryption.
.B merge
tries the one password on every input; unencrypted inputs ignore it, and an
input it does not unlock is an error.
.TP
.BI \-\-password\-file " file"
Read the password from the first line of
.I file
('\-' reads stdin) instead, keeping it out of the process list and shell
history.
.TP
.BI \-\-pages " range"
Page selection, e.g. 1\-3 or 1,3,5 or 2\-4,7. Accepted by split, rotate,
delete, crop, scale, stamp, nup, pagenum, and text.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TSPDF_FALLBACK_FONT
Path to a TrueType font used to render form values outside WinAnsi (CJK,
Greek, ...). When set, no directory scan happens: this font is used, or the
characters render as '?'.
.TP
.B TSPDF_FONT_DIRS
Colon\-separated list of directories to scan for a fallback font, replacing
the built\-in roots (/usr/share/fonts and friends). Only TrueType fonts with
glyf outlines are usable; CFF\-flavored OpenType is skipped.
.TP
.B TSPDF_NO_AESHW
Set to 1 to force the portable AES implementation instead of the hardware
AES instructions.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
tspdf merge a.pdf b.pdf \-o combined.pdf
tspdf split report.pdf \-\-pages 1\-5 \-o extract.pdf
tspdf encrypt doc.pdf \-o locked.pdf \-\-password secret
tspdf watermark doc.pdf \-o draft.pdf \-\-text "DRAFT"
tspdf form fill form.pdf \-\-set name=Ada \-o filled.pdf
tspdf watermark doc.pdf \-o marked.pdf \-\-image logo.png \-\-opacity 0.2
tspdf stamp report.pdf \-\-stamp approved.pdf \-o stamped.pdf
tspdf nup 2 slides.pdf \-o handout.pdf
tspdf compress \-\-lossy scan.pdf \-o small.pdf
tspdf crop doc.pdf \-\-margins 72,36,72,36 \-o cropped.pdf
tspdf scale doc.pdf \-\-to a4 \-o a4.pdf
tspdf serve \-\-port 3000
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qpdf (1),
.BR pdftk (1)
.PP
Project page:
.I https://github.com/be-lang/tspdf
